Bulldog Rangers and I'm serious President Rudder
had a real strong affinity for that dog and you know
he was a bulldog a ranger and that's where he got his
name he was a ranger so we retrieved the old dog and I
guess I was the one that called the physical plant I
said we're gonna have a burial for the Bulldog and
we need a little maroon and white wooden coffin and
And we got him to dig a hole over here. Do you know
where he's buried? Right over here, not far from
the sidewalk. In front of the house. West of the
house. I mean, excuse me, east. And we had a little
ceremony. The public was not invited. Had buried
Ranger.
And it was more emotional than I dreamed that it
would be. When... When Mr. Rutter had a meeting
with the
administrators that reported directly to him,
the vice presidents and so forth, we met every, we
called it the executive committee, and we, what
was it, every Monday?
seems like it was uh like 10 in the morning every
monday i think and he presided that's correct how
uh inclined was he to hear their candid opinions at
that meeting i guess it depended on the uh
on the subject and whether he had already made up
his mind about the way we should move. He would very
quickly let them at least sense the direction that
he thought we should move. and then introduce them
and ask for their opinion. So you would kind of
plant the seed, I think. And there were probably
calls before most meetings, discussions. And the
one that he always remembered, the person of that
group, deans and vice presidents and so forth, the
one that he always admired was Fred Benson. and I
saw I think I saw or at least I know but I think I saw it
Fred got so mad one day that he walked out of the
meeting I have no recollection of what it was about
but he lost his temper and instead of exploding he
just said y'all gonna have to excuse me and he
walked out but people were all given a he gave
everybody a chance to say something he'd go round
robin you know after the business of the day what's
going on over there here there and yonder but uh
people he was not hard to read and people could
pretty well figure out what in advance what he
thought would be the best answer. And of course you
get to know how he thinks and you can predict what
you think that he would think. And enough people
were afraid of him that they wouldn't say what they
really felt sometimes was it better for one of
those key administrators to speak to him
one-on-one if they were in disagreement with his
first judgment was it better for them to speak to
him one-on-one than it was to speak at that staff
meeting yes yeah i would say that's the case yeah it
goes back to his he
had enough general in him that he really thought it
was the wrong thing to do to publicly
debate or disagree he didn't like public debate I
think he would listen to anybody on anything as
long as others weren't there to hear what was
transcribing and uh like i say i i i don't remember
him ever losing his temper i believe you could say
what you wanted to but the the press damn sure
better not be there or someone that might report it
and he would much prefer a one-on-one than i do you
remember any occasions when you persuaded him to
change his mind on a point Not on big things like
coeducation. No. Little things.
Kurt Ergalik, chemistry,
was the coach of the soccer team. He's from
Austria, I think. And he came to the president's
office, and he said, he got an audience. He said,
President Rutter, he said, We've been pushed all
over this campus, and now they tell us that we can't
play on the drill field, and we can't play here or
play there. If the weather is this way, we can't. He
says, if we took care of it, he said, could you have
somebody find us a permanent place to play soccer,
and it has to be somewhere close to DeWare
Fieldhouse so we can take a shower and change
clothes. And so he came in and introduced me to Dr.
Ergolick there in my office, and he said, get the
maps out, get with Shorty Parsons, and find this
man a place to play soccer. And I sat with Kurt, and I
said, how big does a soccer field have to be? What
are the dimensions of a soccer field? And he said,
well, it's variable. He said it doesn't, I mean,
you can make it longer or shorter. There's some,
it's not all that critical. I guess it is in World
Cup, but not this. And we had decided that this area
right here, right there, uh right to the right of
that sidewalk there though it was a little unlevel
he said that that would be a great place we can see
the field house and So I took the map, the plat into
him, and I said, this is where we think it ought to
be. It's perfect. And he said, he had this map. He
said, what is that in the middle of the field? I
said, well, that's a damned old mesquite tree. He
said, don't say damned old mesquite tree. He says,
where I come from? He said, that's a tree. He said,
are you talking about they can't play around that
tree? I said, no, sir. Somebody would run into it
and get killed. or badly injured, I said, if the
tree doesn't go, we can't play this field because
it's right in the middle. He said, no, go find
another place. And I did that three times. And
finally he came in the office one day and he said,
did you ever find old Ergolic, that soccer field? I
said, no, sir. I said, there isn't one except where
that old mesquite tree is. He said, are you really
serious about that? I said, that's right. I said,
President Rutter, there is not a human on this
campus that knows that tree's there except you. I
said, we can, I mean, we spend lots of money
planting trees here. We can do without that one old
mosquito. He said, you have to understand, you
know, I had the driveway changed so it wouldn't
tear down those two mosquitos that are over there
right now by the entryway. He had the whole thing
moved, redesigned. And he said, you talk with
Shorty Parsons, and after dark some night, he
said, have that tree cut down, and I want it
resodded. He said, I don't want to be a trace of that
tree was removed. And that's what happened, and we
played soccer out here. Here's what he would do. on
something like this or sometimes bigger things, I
would say, well, what do you think about this
approach? No, no, no, that's not going to work. And
about a week later, he'd come in and he'd say, what
did you find out about? I said, well, don't you
remember? Our best thought was this or that, and
you vetoed that. So I'm just letting it just sit on
the back. and he'd usually on the third time he'd
come in and say cooper get that tree cut down or
whatever it was but he really thought things out
and he knew that ecology was a big thing in the minds
of people as it was when dr williams was there the
green phase that we went through and he wasn't
about to get ridiculed in the paper for destroying
some of God's creation right here in the middle of
campus. That's the way he thought of it. Which of
the vice presidents and other key people that
reported to him, you mentioned Benson, which
others, I'm only going to ask the positive, not the
negative, which others did he most trust to give
him good advice?
He, I think, had high regard for Wayne Hall. There
were some unfortunate things that you know about
that happened within the family at other times.
But I think he had regard for him.
He thought one of his crowning achievements was
bringing in a man from Columbia, namely Ed
Romanek, isn't that where he came from, Columbia?
I think so. I believe it was Columbia. It was his
thought that this was the first breakthrough in
bringing in a renowned
specialist in a field as a dean. And one of his real
pet projects was to, you know, he coined the word
excellence. We want excellence at every level.
And though he made a couple of mistakes with
personnel, he really thought Ed Romanek was the
breakthrough on bringing people with
that kind of a reputation in. top quality that
would be recognized turns out that ed had some
strange little quirks but but that was that was his
he really thought that was his first move towards
excellence in faculty and then a couple more that
were brought It didn't pan out too well, but he
really, I think, was disappointed often in the
eccentricities of people of excellence. He
doesn't understand that. They're not military
people. They don't think in that way. They're free
spirits, and he always had a hard time
understanding free spirits. Now, in fiscal
matters, he had great trust in Tom Cherry and Clark
Diebel. Clark Diebel particularly. Diebel in
particular because he was in the land office. He
was in charge of all the... uh... the book work over
there and he was a good well they wasn't too wild
about they'd been through german people
particularly but dewa was one he liked they'd been
through the courtroom stress of that uh...
cleaning up that mess over there and jim lindsey of
course he brought in because he had been his PR
person, his press agent in the military. And he
brought him in and and he brought in Jim Hannigan in
Student Affairs because he was he was a military
background. And he brought in Shorty Parsons into
the physical plant because he had a military. His
first assistant, Dorsey McCrory, was a colonel.
And so he was openly at the non-academic level, he
wanted military background people. And I think
that was part of Why he liked me is because I was a
tank platoon leader, which is about as mean and
nasty as it gets. Now, I have heard, see if you have
heard this anecdote. I've heard that when the
aspirations report first came in with
recommendations on the changes of coeducation,
voluntary corps, integration, and so forth, that
he was taken aback by all that was in there, that he
called the deans in, fussed at them, and that they
tried to make excuses except for Fred Benson. Do
you know anything about that session? Not that
specifically, but the part that I do remember is
the blueprint for progress was the working
blueprints to implement the study that had been
done. Isn't that right? Right. And I'll tell you
what he really thought was that it was way out of
line in terms of what it would cost. Honestly, I
think that was it. Because it did call for some
sweeping. You're talking about library,
classroom facilities. We're talking about mega
dollars. And that scared him. It really did scare
him. I don't think he was as mad as he was scared of
what it was going to cost. He didn't think it was
that much money in the world. Because the story I
heard about that session with the deans was that
Benson was the last one to speak up, that the others
had made excuses, and that Benson then said, Mr.
President, you asked for recommendations. If you
didn't want to get them, you shouldn't have asked.
This I remember, yes. And then later, Rutter
called him and said, thank you, Fred, I needed
that. Yes, that did happen. Now that I think of it,
it did happen. When Mr. Rutter was getting ready to
go to Austin or was getting ready to do something
related to state politics, to whom did he turn for
advice on those points?
Do you mean like for a budget hearing? Budget
hearing or any kind of politicking in Austin.
Well, he would talk always with the people that
represented us first. He would never go in there
ignorant of what their position was and why it
would have been like that. Then he would, well,
what he would find out very quickly is who's for and
who's against. whether it was our people or not but
he'd call on our people to say okay what's holding
us back on this who is it and then he'd work through
he
would work through his political system to see if
they couldn't come around and he wouldn't
necessarily want his name used but some cases he
would but he had so many political connections in
big places that He would find out where the
opposition was and try to hit it with long-range
artillery, thinking of alternatives if this
didn't happen. I don't mean he was crooked about
it. He just played his politics. Now, we didn't
have, A&M didn't have a hired lobbyist then, did
we? Not that I recall. No, and we didn't have a
full-time staff member. No. That, in effect, he
was. He was it. Mm-hmm. And I don't think he would
have trusted anybody else to do it. He was smart
enough. He didn't come in on the pickle truck, and
he knew that his name was Magic. And why pay some guy
even $10,000 or $12,000 a year, throwing money
away, to do a job that he can do better with just a few
phone calls? And he may have been right. And also in
those olden days, the number of key people were
clearly more clearly identifiable then than they
are now yeah a lot of them had long tours of duty and
built up to positions you know like uh bill hobby
and uh others like that and uh he knew them i mean he
knew them uh whatever sources he had he knew how
things were going to go and where the key uh where
the key massaging had to be done. And that's where
he'd call Boyle and Sam Wittenberg and say, look,
you got an old boy out here that's really giving us
hell. They're always having trouble out around
Lubbock, obviously, for obvious reasons. And I
think that's where Sam Wittenberg, if Sam
Wittenberg was against someone that was a
candidate for senator or what have you, they ain't
going to make it. The maddest I heard him, now on
that subject, little bits and pieces come back as I
talk. He called me about 11 o'clock one night. He
said, Eddie, I'm going to call three names and you
tell me which ones you've heard of. And he called
those three names, and I said, sir, I don't know
anybody that you're talking about. He says, well,
that's what that goddamn Preston Smith has put on
our board of directors. He said he asked me for a
short list of who to consider, and I gave it to him,
and I called him when I found out what he was doing.
Peyton McKnight was one of them. Boy, I wasn't a
hill winner. And he said, I called the governor. I
said, I don't know who these people are. He said,
how can this be? You asked me for my list, and I gave
it to you. He says, well, there's only one
difference, Earl. He says, they were on my list,
but they weren't on yours.
And that was, I'm nearly sure that was Preston
Smith. I think that's right. I've heard many
people offer great praise for John Connolly's
appointment quality. Did Mr. Rutter sometimes
have an input to the governor, to Governor
Connolly?
Oh, yeah. Yeah. And when he wanted somebody from
the high plains, why not pick the man that
influences everybody in the High Plains every
time they drink coffee? Because he owns all the
newspapers.
And Sam, I don't think Sam came to a third of the
meetings, but you could call him up and say, Sam,
we're still having a problem with old Senator
Snart up there. And boy, that would be over. It was
over. When we were almost all of the board of
directors, as they were then called, almost all of
their meetings were here. That's correct. How did
he prepare for those meetings?
An
exchange of agenda items, first of all, on paper,
as I recall. Now, very often I wouldn't see that.
That was not part of my, he wouldn't get me involved
in those things.
And he would say, you know, to Mr. Wells or whoever,
Clyde, man, you're talking about a hot item there.
He said, this is not the time to have that one on that
agenda. And in those days, they would strike it. So
he would pretty well, he had a lot of influence
about what the agenda would be. then they would
have a closed session and have their arguments and
then they would usually have an open session or a
press conference if anybody was interested and uh
announced unanimous approval always unanimous
approval of whatever came out so telephone and
written exchange of agenda items and i'm sure well
how do you how are you going to vote on this thing And
it was pretty well worked out. And by the time they
got here, they could have sat around and had
cocktails because it was all pretty well done. But
their opinion really was, what can we do to support
you now at this meeting? Now, when you first went to
work for him, Dr. Harrington was the chancellor of
the system. But during your years... the system
Mr. Rutter would become the chief officer of both.
Yeah, I was his assistant at that time. Oh, that
would be after you left? Yes. Were there some pulls
and tugs between the campus president and the
system chancellor when you were working for Mr.
Rutter?
I think the biggest
The most controversial thing that I can remember
was who the service directors reported to. And of
course that came out with later presidencies too
as an issue of some import. But he wanted control.
And part of it was that he knew that the services
generally had a lot of public support, and he just
wanted the university to be affiliated with all
those good things that were happening out there.
And again, it's part of military. It ought to be
under the commanding general, and that's what his
job was. And let the chancellor worry about the
budget and go into Austin and get the money for us
with our help of course. But those services should
be under the college. I know that athletics is now a
big time consumer of any campus executive. What
about athletics in that era?
He
looked at football as a potential plus factor for
the reputation of the school and as just
compensation for the undying generosity of its
alumni. And I think, personally, I think he
overplayed the hand a little bit Like before the
Cotton Bowl game, he called Stallings, he said
Stallings like no other one. Like Jack Williams
could say Pereira Review better. But he got the
team assembled after practice one day and got
right out in the middle of them in the practice
field. His favorite photograph that's ever been
made was him talking, giving a pep talk to the team
before they went to the 1968 Cotton Bowl game where
they did beat Alabama. And he took me with him from
that game into the dressing room to thank the boys
for paying so much attention to what he had said to
them before the game. But see, he had been a coach
and it just was part of his bloodstream.
He wanted excellence in football. And the other
sports, he wouldn't have walked across the street
for. And didn't, as far as I can remember. He went to
the football games, particularly the home games,
regularly. But I wasn't aware that he attended
many of the other sports. Yeah, he did. Oh, other
sports? Did not. That's one. And he went to nearly
all of the out-of-town games. One time he called me
like on a Friday,
and we were playing Texas Tech in Lubbock, and the
odds were very good that we weren't going to win
that game. It had not been a good season. And he
said, how'd you like to go dove hunting? I said,
well, sure, when? He said, we'll go out to ranch and
shoot some doves tomorrow. I said, well, sir,
we're playing Tech tomorrow, how's that going to
work? He said, I'll tell you how it's worked. I'm
sick and tired of this, getting our butts whipped,
and I'm not going to love it. He said, let's go dove
hunting. I'm not going to tell anybody where we
are. So Ms. Rutter and Peggy and I and Mr. Rutter
went out there, and we shot some ducks illegally. I
did. They were on the pond where we were shooting
doves. The doves weren't coming in, and I said to
him, Have you ever had fried duck? He says, no, I bet
that'd be good. And I said, well, just keep your
head down. I'm going to shoot a couple. And I did,
and we had fried duck. And he just thought that was
great. But we had a grand time. We went to London.
He said, have you ever seen the dance hall at
London? I said, no. He said, we're going down there
and eat a chicken fried steak. And the girls stayed
at the house. And he and I drove to London, Texas,
which is about eight miles from London, eight
miles to Hex, to the ranch. It was in between. And
there was a dance hall right next door. And while
the tech kickoff was underway, he and I were at the
London Cafe eating chicken fried steak. And the
band was struck up next door. at the dance hall, and
they are still there, that little dance hall. And I
said, well, you reckon the dance is in full bloom
yet? And he held his hand up against the wooden
wall, and he says, no, it ain't vibrating enough
yet. He said, they're not really. But he'd had a
stomach full of it, and he didn't want to face West
Texas. And we did that several times, just escape
and go out. Alright, hunting or fishing, what
other escapes were there for him from the
pressures of the task? What did he do to relax? He'd
go out to the ranch and look at the cows.
He was not gifted in any way with hunting or
fishing. He was very poorly coordinated. Oh, so he
didn't hunt or fish much? Oh, he'd go. Oh, okay. But
you're saying he wasn't that skillful. He wasn't
good at it. We were down at Tennicott
with an alumni board meeting. And there's
probably the best fishing lakes in Texas. And Bob
Logan and I are both fishermen. And we'd go out and
we'd catch enough fish the first morning to feed
the whole group a big fish dinner. And that
afternoon, after we brought in huge stringers of
fish, it was just get the hook out and know how to
bring them in. And he said, Edwin, I want you to take
me fishing this afternoon. I took him out there.
He'd cast right into the wind and the line would
loop out like this. And the fish would grab it and
start off with it. By the time he set the hook with
the wind loop in it, the fish was gone. He was just
poorly coordinated. Same with shooting the gun.
He was not good at it. But he would go out. We'd go to
Herman Heap Place at Buda and hunt quail. Well,
that was a joke. Or we'd fish. And he'd sit around
and talk with whoever our host was. Then we go into
Austin and go to the Hofbrau and have a big steak.
What he liked to do was have a few beers and eat a big
steak. That's how he relaxed. Because he had no
hobbies, did he? Had no hobbies, none whatever. He
didn't. The only collection he had was medals that
he had earned. And that was a pretty good
collection. All right, let's end this pleasant
interview with at least one funny rudder story.
The best one. And I know I've told you before, but it
ought to be recorded. I'm in his office with a happy
file and a sad file one morning. We're playing
Baylor University on Saturday. This is like
Thursday. Abner McCall calls him. I'm in the
office. He says, keep your seat. It's Abner. Ms.
Hott had called and told us. And they talk
business.